Python Versions
Every programming language evolves as new ideas and technologies emerge,
and the developers of Python have continually made the language more
versatile and powerful. As of this writing, the latest version is Python 3.11,
but everything in this book should run on Python 3.9 or later. In this sec-
tion, we’ll find out if Python is already installed on your system and whether
you need to install a newer version. Appendix A contains additional details
about installing the latest version of Python on each major operating system
as well.
Running Snippets of Python Code
You can run Python’s interpreter in a terminal window, allowing you to try
bits of Python code without having to save and run an entire program.
Throughout this book, you’ll see code snippets that look like this:
>>> print("Hello Python interpreter!")
Hello Python interpreter!
The three angle brackets (>>>) prompt, which we’ll refer to as a Python
prompt, indicates that you should be using the terminal window. The bold
text is the code you should type in and then execute by pressing ENTER.
Most of the examples in this book are small, self-contained programs that
you’ll run from your text editor rather than the terminal, because you’ll
write most of your code in the text editor. But sometimes, basic concepts
will be shown in a series of snippets run through a Python terminal session
to demonstrate particular concepts more efficiently. When you see three
angle brackets in a code listing, you’re looking at code and output from
a terminal session. We’ll try coding in the interpreter on your system in a
moment.
We’ll also use a text editor to create a simple program called Hello World!
that has become a staple of learning to program. There’s a long-held tradi-
tion in the programming world that printing the message Hello world! to
the screen as your first program in a new language will bring you good luck.
Such a simple program serves a very real purpose. If it runs correctly on your
system, then any Python program you write should work as well.
About the VS Code Editor
VS Code is a powerful, professional-quality text editor that’s free and beginner-
friendly. VS Code is great for both simple and complex projects, so if you
become comfortable using it while learning Python, you can continue using
it as you progress to larger and more complicated projects. VS Code can be
installed on all modern operating systems, and it supports most programming
languages, including Python.
Appendix B provides information on other text editors. If you’re curi-
ous about the other options, you might want to skim that appendix at this
4 Chapter 1
N O T E point. If you want to begin programming quickly, you can use VS Code to
start. Then you can consider other editors, once you’ve gained some experi-
ence as a programmer. In this chapter, I’ll walk you through installing VS
Code on your operating system.
If you already have a text editor installed and you know how to configure it to run
Python programs, you are welcome to use that editor instead.
Python on Different Operating Systems
Python is a cross-platform programming language, which means it runs on
all the major operating systems. Any Python program you write should run
on any modern computer that has Python installed. However, the methods
for setting up Python on different operating systems vary slightly.
In this section, you’ll learn how to set up Python on your system. You’ll
first check whether a recent version of Python is installed on your system,
and install it if it’s not. Then you’ll install VS Code. These are the only two
steps that are different for each operating system.
In the sections that follow, you’ll run hello_world.py and troubleshoot
anything that doesn’t work. I’ll walk you through this process for each oper-
ating system, so you’ll have a Python programming environment that you
can rely on.
Python on Windows
Windows doesn’t usually come with Python, so you’ll probably need to
install it and then install VS Code.
Installing Python
First, check whether Python is installed on your system. Open a command
window by entering command into the Start menu and clicking the Command
Prompt app. In the terminal window, enter python in lowercase. If you get a
Python prompt (>>>) in response, Python is installed on your system. If you
see an error message telling you that python is not a recognized command,
or if the Microsoft store opens, Python isn’t installed. Close the Microsoft
store if it opens; it’s better to download an official installer than to use
Microsoft’s version.
If Python is not installed on your system, or if you see a version
earlier than Python 3.9, you need to download a Python installer for
Windows. Go to https://python.org and hover over the Downloads link.
You should see a button for downloading the latest version of Python.
Click the button, which should automatically start downloading the cor-
rect installer for your system. After you’ve downloaded the file, run the
installer. Make sure you select the option Add Python to PATH, which
will make it easier to configure your system correctly. Figure 1-1 shows
this option selected.